Ireland Norway and Spain have announced
that they will recognize Palestinian
statehood Israel has long opposed such
International recognition for the
Palestinian territories and the move
will increase the Diplomatic isolation
generated by its military offensive in
Gaza Israeli reaction was Swift and
Furious prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is completely opposed to an
independent Palestinian State and said
the announcement amounted to a reward
for Terror that would threaten his
country's security 139 of the un's 193
members already recognize as Palestinian
statehood but today's announcement
carries weight because most Western
European countries have held back from
establishing diplomatic relations with
an independent
Palestine barred off from Israel by
fences and barriers the Palestinian
territories will be formally recognized
as a state by three more European
countries Spain Ireland and Norway
choosing to support the Palestinian push
for sovereignty a step they say towards
[Applause]
peace the time has come to move from
words to action to tell the millions of
innocent suffering Palestinians that we
are with them that there is hope and to
make it very clear that no matter how
many walls are erected no matter how
many villages are bombed and no matter
how many illegal settlements are built
the land and the identity of Palestine
will continue to exist in our hearts in
international legality and in the future
project of a Mediterranean in
harmony previously 139 of 193 un
countries recognized the state of
Palestine latest signatories calling on
others to do the
same in the midst of war with tens of
thousands of dead and injured we must
keep alive the only thing that can
provide a safe home for both Israelis
and Ians two states that can live in
peace with each other Israel and
Palestine Germany's foreign minister
rejected unilateral recognition of
Palestinian
statehood I have repeatedly made it
clear that a solution to this terrible
situation that we are currently
experiencing does not require symbolic
recognition but a political
solution a solution to the Middle East
conflict and a two-state solution
requires direct negotiations on both
sides Israel's government also hit back
regarding a Palestinian State there are
people who support this opinion and
there are people who do not but this is
not the place nor the time now to come
and unilaterally recognize a Palestinian
State and any such decision harms
Israeli sovereignty and Israeli security
and we will not allow it
I order to recall our ambassadors back
home and we will take all measures to
prevent
that President Mahmud abas the leader of
the Palestinian Authority welcomed the
recognition and called on other nations
to quote support the struggle of our
people for Liberation and
Independence Daniel Levy is president of
the US midle project that's a nonprofit
organization that focuses on the Israel
Palestinian conflict and aims to to
promote peace he was part of the Israeli
team of negotiators that took part in
the Oslo Peace Accords process in the
1990s and advised a former Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak welcome to DW can we
start with your reaction to this
announcement one I guess primarily
wonders what's taken so long for
countries that are committed to two
states and why are these countries
relatively isolated among the European
States who are yet to recognize
Palestine and then one wonders what
next because the act of recognition as
long as it remains just that is rather
symbolic the state that they have
recognized is under an occupation in
which there are daily violations of
international law so will these and
indeed the states that have not
recognized Palestine begin to hold
Israel accountable for those violations
and if not why should we expect anything
to improve anything to change and for
there to be still a prospect of the
two-state outcome which even those who
have not recognized such as the German
foreign minister uh have said that they
endorse and so I think that becomes the
question so when I when I spoke to the
the Norwegian foreign minister uh
earlier today put some of those points
to him and one of the things that that
that he said uh was that well this adds
to the pressure on Israel recognizing
that this is somewhat
symbolic until the United States shifts
its
position well I think he's correct that
it adds to a sense
of isolation is too strong a word but of
Israel losing uh some of the support of
even his friends the Israeli reaction
has been uh somewhat hysterical but I
think that's partly performative as a
way of hoping that one can intimidate
and pressure these countries not from
doing more and other countries not from
following suit yes I think the Norwegian
foreign minister and others are correct
to suggest that where the the real heavy
leverage resides is with Washington DC
but and it's an important but to say
well you know the only people who can do
anything are the Americans is an
abdication of responsibility that's not
the approach that one takes on Ukraine
or elsewhere where America is going to
have a disproportionate influence so I
think it is up to every state to ask
itself is Israel making conditions
impossible for Palestinian statehood is
Israel and this was the response by the
way of an Israeli Minister foreign
minister until recently he said between
the river and the Sea and by the way I'm
quoting him for batim because I know
people sometimes get upset about that
expression but it's one the Israelis use
from the River to the Sea there is only
one state and that is Israel so he is
basically saying we have a parthe
Palestinians will never have their
rights and what is the reaction of those
who've recognized and those who haven't
recognized to what Israel is doing I
would argue that it's not just up to
America Israel needs to be held
accountable needs to be sanctioned for
its actions by a cross-section of
countries who claim to uphold
international law because number one
that is what will have Israelis not
saying oh thank you you know now we'll
give the Palestinians what they want but
it will have Israelis saying is there a
cost for this right what is the equation
here what's the incentive structure and
it of course also creates a different
environment in which the Americans
operating okay we'll just we'll just
pick up on on one of the points you made
there when you talk about um uh a par a
a term that of course has been contested
in the in the Israeli context but I did
want to ask you uh about one of the the
uh reactions that I think you've you've
called us hysterical we have Benjamin
Netanyahu describing the announcement as
a reward for terrorism it's easy to see
what he means don't you think Hamas
launches a a terror attack on Israel
Israel retaliates and then these
European countries from the safety of
thousands of miles away choose to
recognize Palestinian statehood
well I think that what you've seen in
the Israeli reaction and of course
history didn't begin on October 7th
October 7th was a shocking uh violation
of international law what Israel does
every day prior to that were violations
of international law what Israel has
done subsequently has led also to arrest
warrants being recommended by the chief
prosecutor of the international criminal
court and to provisional measures being
called for for the prevention of
irreparable harm to Palestinians by the
international court of justice
considering a genocide case so this does
not come in a vacuum now have those
countries withdrawn their recognition of
Israel as a consequence of its
violations of international law no are
they therefore rewarding terrorism by
going forward with this recognition also
no by the way Phil I would prefer that
they had recognized and others had
recognized long ago and had taken other
measures I cannot not prove the
counterfactual but I think that had
Israel not been indulged and allowed to
get away with this for so long it would
not have had the hubris to create a
situation which doesn't justify October
7th but made it more likely and you
wouldn't have the kind of extremists in
the Israeli government okay who have
been out to provoke from day one and so
the longer we wait to take these
measures the more likely we are to see
more violence and that's why nonviolent
measures like this like sanctions are
what Palestinians and Israelis need
let's talk about the the um the state of
Palestine uh so to speak other 139
countries that currently recognize uh
Palestine uh plus of course today's
three are they all recogniz recognizing
the same lines on the map a viewers are
now looking at a at a map of the region
based on
pre-1967 at demarcations are we all
talking about the same
thing it's such an important question
Phil and I'm very I'm very glad that you
asked
because even the exact wording of the
statements coming out of the three uh
slightly varied so I think that what one
needs to recognize if one's going to
recognize two states is either the 1967
lines or indeed the UN partition plan of
1947 I think most are leaning into the
1967 lines that's the map that you
shared with us
but the Norwegians for instance excuse
me the Norwegians for instance kept open
the option of land swaps in the context
of negotiations right and this comes to
the the issue of do we know what we're
recognizing and what are we doing
subsequent to the recognition the
reality today is there is one political
space one state in which there are
unequal rights to undo that really
requires ending the occupation it
shouldn't require too much
negotiation well nor Minister of Foreign
Affairs is Espen Bart AA and he joins us
now from Oslo welcome to DW what do you
hope this move will
achieve well this is a statement from uh
three European countries uh very clearly
saying that this is the right thing to
do but also the right moment the right
time uh because we want to contribute to
reestablishing a credible faith in and a
credible path towards two-state solution
and a Palestinian State living in peace
beside Israel which has been the dream
since the original Oso cords but what we
also realized is just sitting idly by
waiting for the sides to negotiate this
at the time of their own making forever
has not worked for 30 years and we need
to uh strengthen the position of the
Palestinian side but still trying to
seek a two-state solution where both
peoples can live in peace and we do that
together today we hope other European
countries will follow and we also do
this as a support to the Arab peace
vision for a comprehensive solution to
the Middle East crisis okay so just I'm
I'm clear you you've done this because
you think it's the right thing to do and
in terms of practical achievements you
hope to strengthen the Palestinian uh
position and provide um support for for
Arab countries and what will you
recognize
is on May the 28th I think it is borders
on a map a political entity what what
what will you actually
do well remember there there are
institutions in place there is a state
of Palestine as it's called which is the
Palestine Authority based in rala and
the West Bank which has uh uh some
control over the territory in West Bank
and in East Jerusalem unfortunately not
so much in Gaza not only because of the
war but because Hamas took over control
there but there is a Palestinian entity
that has a a position also in the UN not
as a full member but but as a non-state
Observer and this is the entity that we
recognize that again is based on the
promise of PLO the Palestine Liberation
Organization back in the 90s to give up
the armed struggle to continue only
through peaceful means and and that's a
promise that they've actually held and
they have systematically these more
moderate Palestinian in their
Palestinian Administration have been uh
true to that premise theyve even
collaborated extensively with Israel on
security issues in the West Bank but
their capacity have been weakened by an
Ever growing amount of illegal Israeli
settlements for instance and it been
really hard to run uh that Proto State
and we want to lift their Authority but
also to lift their capacity and how much
was this decision influenced by Israel
current war against
Hamas this is a reaction to not only the
current war against Hamas but to the
situation that we have seen over years I
mean we've seen the expansion of
settlements we've seen very limited
progress or no progress in cooperation
towards the settlement we've seen the
terror attacks from an extreme group
Hamas on Israel we have seen the extreme
the very violent response from Israel
into Gaza we see the settler violence in
the West Bank this is a violence spiral
which will continue if we do not break
this cycle so we want to break out of
this cycle of Eternal violence and
reestablish faith in in an alternative
which is a peaceful settlement uh with
where a Palestinian state is recognized
as part of a broader comprehensive plan
and we think the time is now and we
think that everything is happened is
inspired by exactly that so how
celebrated your move today Israel
recalled its Envoy from Oslo in protest
so and the for we have the foreign
minister today saying that Ireland and
no way intend to send a message today to
the Palestinians and the whole world
terrorism pays he also said this
recognition would impede efforts to
return Israel's hostages being held in
Gaza and make a ceasefire less likely
because you've rewarded the jihadists of
Hamas I'd like your your your uh
response to those points
please well I I I totally and completely
disagree with those statements we are
doing exactly the opposite we are
recognizing the the moderate forces the
the pl the Palestinian Authority the
people who have renounced violence who
and who are the enemies of
Hamas this is absolutely an anti- Hamas
move it was welcomed by the Palestinian
Authority by key Palestinian leaders by
key Arab states precisely as a
recognition that there are still
moderate forces who are willing to look
for a peaceful settlement this is not
what Hamas wants because they want to
their fight is against the existence of
the state of Israel the Palestine we
recognize is a Palestine that recognizes
formally and in practice the existence
of Israel and wants to live in peace and
cooperate with Israel so this is exactly
the opposite of what the Israel for
success and I think this will move
forward to a situation where at the end
of the day it will be better to be both
an Israeli and a Palestinian because
this endless cycle of violence is broken
Israel's foreign minister also said
today that your country's Ambassador
will be summoned for reprimand talks
during which they'll be shown a video of
the Abduction of female Israeli soldiers
on October the 7th what will your
instruction to your Ambassador
be you know we have they have said a lot
of things about our ambassador they
recall their own ambassador we have no
intention of doing anything of that sort
so of course when he is asked to come to
the ministry he will politely come and
he will see what they want to show them
and I don't think he needs to learn more
about the horrible terrorist attacks of
7th of October we have seen these images
which are terrible just as we are seeing
all the horror that is being uh uh
experienced by the civilian population
of of of Gaza there is too much violence
and some of that violence happened on
the 7th of October and was
AB absolutely uh reprehensible so I I
think that that response he will be
there um I will also tell the very nice
person who is the U Israeli ambassador
to Oso who is actually the Ambassador I
have met most frequently as for Minister
that when he comes back from his stay in
uh in Israel uh he will be invited to a
nice cup of coffee in my office and
we'll talk about things okay thank you
so much for sparing us the time I it
must be a very busy day today for you
Norwegian foreign minister esman Bart AA
thank
you thank you very
much okay let's get more from DW's
Rebecca ritters in Jerusalem and Jack
parck who is joining us from Brussels
Jack three European countries they're
recognizing Palestinian statehood can
you tell us what this means
exactly well it is a political statement
and it's also a very symbolic one
obviously the Spanish prime minister uh
Pedro Sanchez when he announced made the
announcement in Madrid earlier today he
said that the recognition serves to tell
the Palestinians we are with you Simon
Harris the leader in Ireland he said
that the recognition of the pal it's a
recognition of the Palestinian people to
their right to self determination it is
a really significant move for the three
countries it is symbolic they're not
necessarily the biggest diplomatic uh
powers of Europe but they have been
making uh they've been saying that
they're going to do this for some time
of them it will come into Force this
recognition on May the 28th there were
other countries Belgium was perhaps
going to be expected to do this
alongside them we do know that there are
moves here in Belgium to make a similar
announcement and indeed potentially in
France as well now what although it is
symbolic it is also significant because
Arab countries have said that they will
only be involved in the sort of policing
of a reconstruction of a post-war Gaza
if Western Nations recognize a state in
Palestine so the more countries that do
that the more support that there would
be from those Arab Nations to fund
firstly a post-war uh Palestinian State
okay and looking at reactions from
Israel Rebecca Israel has now recalled
its ambassadors to the three countries
what else is Israel doing and
saying well this announcement has drawn
Fury from Israel probably unsurprisingly
to most viewers Israel completely
opposes the decision that has been
announced this joint decision by Spain
uh Ireland and Norway um Benjamin netan
who has long said that establishing a
Palestinian state would be an
existential danger to Israel that and
and been standing against it certainly
since uh the war that began on October 7
as you mentioned the ambassadors to
those three countries have been recalled
and they are looking at further measures
the finance min bet L smotrich has
called for further punitive measures uh
and said that he will be withholding tax
uh that Israel collects uh and then
gives to the Palestinian collects for
the Palestinian Authority and then hands
over he'll be withholding those taxes
and they'll be looking at further
punitive measures now um in response to
this the foreign minister this morning
said that it sends a message to
Palestinians and to the world that
terrorism pays he also said that it will
harm efforts to uh retrieve the
remaining hostages inside Gaza so a very
strong reaction from Israel on the
Palestinian side we've seen a much more
positive response obviously uh the
Palestinian Authority who have always
been fighting for a two-state solution
have uh reacted positively and Hamas has
also come out to say that they think
this is a step in the right direction
okay and all of this is happening just a
couple of days after the chief
prosecutor at the international criminal
court of course announced that he's
seeking arrest warrants for the Israeli
Prime Minister and for for the Israeli
defense minister so is all of this
pressure Rebecca having any effect on
Benjamin
Netanyahu well I there's no doubt that
pressure is mounting on prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu and the Israeli
government and Israel uh on the
international stage there's absolutely
no doubt about that this week
particularly uh the pressure has been
mounting and we are seeing that it's
having an effect on the government on
Representatives here on prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu himself s we can see
that in the way that everyone is
responding both to the ICC news on
Monday and to today's decision pretty
much across the board uh so you know um
bipartisan responses to these
announcements uh particularly of course
the ICC that was uh you know everyone on
both sides of government were saying
that that was an outrage um so pressure
definitely mounting but when we look at
how much that might affect Benjamin
netanyahu's you know decision and the
way that he's planning the this war
going forward I think we won't see uh
much change we won't see it effect he is
really fighting for his political
survival H and that really means also
continuing this war in Gaza that is
something that he's been saying that his
government are adamant that they are
going to do that they're going to
continue with this Rafa offensive that
they are uh determined to dismantle
Hamas and retrieve the hostages uh and
that nothing will stop them so uh he
doesn't want to face the day after
because that is when he said that they
will investigate and look at the the
wrongdoings and that led up to October 7
and he knows that that will be very
difficult situation for him all right
Jack I just wanted to ask you what about
other European countries I mean will any
more now potentially recognize
Palestinian
statehood it's likely that they probably
will potentially Belgium potentially
France what's really interesting about
this well it shows the ever deepening
Rift between Israel and some of its
traditional Western allies it ALS show
also shows the Visions among some EU
member states now the European Union's
position is has always and long has been
to work to a two-state solution many uh
of the eu's countries feel that the the
recognition of a Palestinian state is
the end of the negotiations of that uh
that goal of making a two-state solution
what we're seeing now is certain
countries I mean Ireland uh um Norway
and Spain obviously saying that for them
this is the starting point now countries
like Germany uh for instance wouldn't
allow that to to go so so now we're
seeing some of those divisions really
start to play out in Europe let's bring
in Laura Blumenfeld she is a Middle East
analyst and New York Times bestselling
author who joins us from Washington DC
good to speak to you Laura now just
looking at this news what changes as a
result of these countries recognizing uh
Palestinian state
well listen recognition doesn't answer
any of the hard questions I can tell you
that as a former senior policy adviser
on the Israeli Palestinian negotiating
team for the state department under
President Obama I mean we have to
determine borders security refugees
Jerusalem recognition is symbolic and I
guess it was a three for one kind of
deal for these countries because they
were able to recognize Palestine
reprimand Israel and also kind of give a
little Ras to the United States for
handling or perhaps mishandling on what
they see our Middle East negotiations
until
now and the response from Israel of
course uh we've seen Israel recalling
its ambassadors but uh prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu says this move the
recognition rewards terrorism how would
you assess that
statement Netanyahu is feeling
increasingly isolated and there's a kind
of undertone of violence um to his
language especially on a day like today
where they released the hostage tape of
the young 19-year-old female soldiers
who were bloodied and and bound by palan
gunmen uh the way that Netanyahu has put
it is he says we won't let them Ram a
Palestinian State down our throats and
it's really troubling but again this
just feeds his Narrative of isolation
and doesn't clear the path forward
unfortunately that's why the United
States says the best way forward is
through direct bilateral negotiations um
you know rather than
jamming uh and and game on either side
so in Ence you're saying
netanyahu's further pushed Israel into
into further isolation with his
response well I think Netanyahu has
taken a position of you know with you or
without you I'm going into Rafa I'm
going to prosecute this battle for total
Victory it kind of reinforces his
paranoia the Israelis need reassurance
after October 7th the Palestinians need
respect but real respect means Real
Results unfortunately by declaring
independence it doesn't really create
any kind of path forward any kind of
defining way forward to actually
establishing that state right now we're
looking at a you know a heap of rubble
how can we build from the bottom up
rather than making declarations the
United States is trying to kind of use
this to Pivot to create some diplom
diplomatic momentum and say look if
there is going to be a Palestinian State
Israelis why don't you jump on the train
and join this Mega deal with Saudi
Arabia which we've been pushing ping
right which would normalize relations
for you with a major Gulf Power we
create a power Dynamic a security Packa
with Saudi Arabia and we can get going
on the on the sort of goal that we were
pursuing before October 7th before Hamas
spoiled it which is greater Regional
integration and economic um you know
prosperity for all and on that note what
do you expect the US to to to do as a
result of these
developments well they're doing what
they've always been doing which is bance
right on the same day that Jake Sullivan
pushed back and said this was not
productive uh this declaration of
independence they also pushed back on
the Israelis and said withholding tax
revenue as a form of punishment to the
Palestinian Authority is also not
constructive you saw it in Secretary
blinken's uh testimony on the hill where
he had the right-wing Senators kind of
wagging their finger at him from the
podium where behind him they had the
left-wing demonstrators waving bloody
hands behind him this is the line that
Biden has been walking it's a tight rope
with no net but I think his conscience
is guiding him okay we'll leave it there
for now Middle East analyst Laura
Blumenfeld in Washington DC thank you
for speaking to us thank you